Boris Groys ends "On Art Activism" punctuating the point that art activism destroys the status quo and leads the way for political action; stabilizing the status quo is ineffective while destroying the status quo is successful. Throughout the essay, I am left wondering -- what happens after the destruction of the status quo? Who needs to be convinced of this destruction, and what can/will they do once what they know is destroyed? 

In the beginning of the piece, Groys offers that art activists try to replace the social state and NGOs that can't or won't fulfill their roles. However, Groys fails to mention any way that art activism might replace organizations and social structures embedded within modern society (the status quo). It is important to acknowledge that artists aim to change conditions outside of the current system, but Groys only offers that art activists do this by showcasing the status quo as a corpse, a thing of the past, a reality that is no longer real. How are conditions actually being changed outside of the current system? 

Groys makes a distinction between design and art, delineating that design is meant to make the status quo more attractive by making it "better" while art does not aim to make anything better (and is more about reduction than expansion). In the book "Speculative Design," Fiona Raby and Anthony Dunne argue that there is a place for "design fiction" - imagining new conditions and societies, divorced from commercialization. I think they'd agree with Groys that we can't fix the status quo by creating more "better" products that still live within the status quo -- instead, we need to unravel the ideas that feed the success of those products. In this case, "specualtive design" is about moving away from the current status quo, but is less focused on killing the status quo, and more geared towards imagining a different reality (like Western society without capitalism). To me, this achieves the same thing (abandoning the status quo), but feels more like activism (getting people to do something different) than the way Groys describes art activism. 

Regardless, I agree with Groys that art activism is not useless -- it is meant to engage the viewer, "betray expectations, reveal invisible presence of death where we only see life," -- however, I don't believe art activism (as described) is changing conditions outside of the status quo. As Groys mentions at the end, art activism is a precursor to real political action, once it engages the people within the system to create something outside of it. 
